Introduction
What if consciousness does not emerge from matter but is a fundamental property of the
Universe - one that governs how reality unfolds across dimensions?
Consciousness being an extremely vast subject requires a lifetime of studying and figuring out
the various fundamental factors or the basis that may be responsible for this universe.
The ideas have been derived from personal experience of existence.
That basically means the model of consciousness has been built from the first principles.
Axioms are defined, new concepts are introduced and discussed, and gradually , the model
becomes complex with many moving parts to it.
You may find some loopholes, because this is still a work in progress.
You may also find some interesting ideas.
The text occasionally references concepts from undergraduate-level mathematics. While
familiarity with these ideas might enhance the understanding, it is not essential. Readers may
freely skip the mathematical sections without losing the overall message or flow of the essay .
So! Let's begin by defining Consciousness.
What is Consciousness?
Axioms:Consciousness is the origin of existence, life, the animate and the inanimate beings.
It is the inherent property of all that is being.
1. Consciousness exists1.
2. Everything else is derived from and within consciousness2. This implies that
consciousness is a fundamental aspect of all that exists, a stance resonant with
panpsychism.
3. Consciousness is continuous except for the points at which singularities exist.  We
consider it to be a Psychophysically Neutral Space, as described in Neutral Monism. It is a
topological space with the metric as the degree of Awareness. So, for Thought Space,
similar thoughts would be closer and in the Physical Space, as well as the thought space,
higher complexity structures would form over time.
4. Awareness increases non-monotonically with time , organizing thoughts and
experiences along structured paths. Awareness increases over time much like entropy ,
though not necessarily toward disorder . It's an impersonal, universal field, and increasing
awareness drives the evolution of coherent thought structures. For more information, see
the section on Awareness for the definition.
A continuous consciousness is defined as follows:
∀ϵ>0,∃δ>0:∀x1,x2,|x1−x2|<δ⟹ |f(x1)−f(x2)|<ϵ25
We will assume that ϵ takes a minimum value at planck scale. W e will be considering what
happens at the planck scale and the possibility of quantum ef fects.
Using Axiom 2, we observe that the divisions we perceive: between self and other , mind and
matter , subject and object, are not real. They are mental constructs. Emergent, not essential.
This brings us to an interesting topic that is deeply rooted in many ancient traditions: Non-
dualism.
1.Non-Dualism
“We have therefore wanted to say that all our intuition is nothing but the representation of
appearance; that the things that we intuit are not in themselves what we intuit them to be, ...and
that if we remove our own subject or even only the subjective constitution of the senses in
general, then all constitution, all relations of objects in space and time, indeed space and time
themselves would disappear , and as appearances they cannot exist in themselves, but only in
us. What may be the case with objects in themselves and abstracted from all this receptivity of
our sensibility remains entirely unknown to us. W e are acquainted with nothing except our way
of perceiving them, which is peculiar to us..."3 -Kant.
The concept of non duality has been discussed by a wide range of philosophies and religions in
human history . From Advaita V edanta and Bhagavad Gita4 in Hinduism to Meister Eckhart’ s
writings in Christian mysticism5. From Zen and Taoist philosophies in the East to the ideas of
Friedrich Nietzsche6 in the W est.
Non dualism has been the basis for realization of the unspeakable truth of existence and life,
god and morality , the infinite and mortality .
It is however interesting to note that the explanations and interpretations of non dualism have
been scarcely formalized.
First, we discuss the concept of an Integrated Set and a Reference Frame and how on the
application of latter upon the former brings us to the familiar world in which we live. From there,
we will head back to our starting point using what we know as non-dualism.
Data as the fundamental unit
Definition 1: Datum (singular for data) is a unit point in a given void or empty space.
If two or more data points is considered, they are assumed to be identical and
indistinguishable in their raw and individual form.
It may form a simple connection with its surrounding points to form more complex structures.
We assume data to be the fundamental unit for both physical and semi-physical spaces(Which
will be defined later). This aligns with the idea proposed by the physicist John Archibald
Wheeler in his concept of "It from Bit" which states that every physical entity ultimately
arises from binary yes/no informational distinctions31.
The precise nature of data (whether physical or semi-physical) is beyond the scope of this text.
For purposes of this model, we assume it as a given.
Integrated set
A set is a collection of objects26.
Definition 2:
An Integrated set is one which is one whole or one that has no part to it,
provided no Reference frame is attached to it.
An integrated set is analogous to the term individual, that is something that cannot be
divided into parts.
Example.
Consider a human being. While on a smaller scale of reference, it can be
differentiated into body parts such as bones and organs, at a macroscopic scale of
reference, it can be viewed as a single undivided entity .
On the other hand, individuals can be viewed as part of a bigger collective or society if viewed
through a wider frame of reference(defined below).
Frame of reference
Definition 3: A reference frame or a frame of reference is a mental construct7, that is, a
concept applied on an Integrated Set and used to distinguish between two volumes
displaying dif ferent properties such as color , motion, shape, size etc.8
Dualistic Reference Frame
Definition 4: The most common form of Reference frame that we apply to identify objects
and events in the real world are Dualistic Reference Frames(DRF).
They are called so because they polarize the Integrated set or divide it into 2 parts.
Examples:
Mathematical description of DRFs:
We define a dualistic reference frame r as following:
r2
i={(i,¬i)|i∈S,i∧¬i=ϕ}
Where r2
i : dualistic (or 2nd degree) reference frame for an integrated set S used to define i
which is a collection of data points.
and the statement defines a tuple of i along with its current complement.
Hence, for n independent dualistic reference frames, you can generate up to 2n distinct
partitions of the integrated set.
The Universe as an Integrated Set
The universe can be defined as an Integrated Set or a system in which, provided no
reference frame is applied, one cannot distinguish any one data point from another .
It is considered that all the boundaries between any of the separate bodies is dissolved, be it
living from non-living, animate from the inanimate, macroscopic from the microscopic etc.
Hence, it is observed that the Universe is a continuous, integrated body .
This is our basis for non dualism. While under the application of a large number of reference
frames, we observe the environment we're familiar with, the realization of the presence of
these constructs bring us one step closer to an integrated, continuous reality .
Consequences of Non-DualismPhysical DRFs:
(Apple, Table): Based on color and shape of the two, we can dif ferentiate them
(Car, Road): Based on the shape and motion of one upon the other , we can
separate them.
Semi-physical DRFs:
These include abstract concepts such a (good, bad) or (interesting, boring).
They are used to identify the quality of thoughts or concepts such as the thought
of theft is considered bad as opposed to good
They can also be used to label events in time such as an event to watch a movie
can be considered interesting as opposed to boring.
2.Thoughts
Thought Space
Physical space is perceivable by the physical senses. Everything that can be verified by
Science is physical.
Thought Space is a hypothesized space on the boundary of the physical and non-physical
space. So it is a semi-physical space.
In this space each point represents a single unit of thought: a type-Thought data.
This is a space where:1. Everything exists in continuity as a spectrum.
For example: Between 0 and 1, there are an infinite number of numbers making the shift
from 0 to 1 continuous.
2. Therefore we may consider that physical space may be part of a spectrum to semi-physical
space and not strictly divided from it.
We will make an attempt at solving the Combination problem in Panpsychism using the
concept of non-dualism later in this essay .
It is not in the scope of this text to answer whether semi-physical space exists or not.
However , we will go to the limits of what we consider to be physical while exploring the
semi-physical space.
We will cover the following topics:
Thought space
Language space
Awareness
Combination problem in Panpsychism
Any point is a Thought
Any straight line is a Logical or Mathematical sequence of thoughts
Any non-straight line (curved line) is not a form of logic, science or mathematics.
Consider the paths from A to B.
The dotted line is the most ef ficient, abstract, or mathematical trajectory to put a sequence
of thoughts together . It may not exist in the form of Language due to its pure logical
structure.
The line closely following the dotted line may be considered the logical sequence of
thoughts that can be converted into Language.
All other curves from A to B contain redundant information or deviate from the core logic.
These may include emotional, intuitive thoughts. While they may introduce redundancy or
non-linearity , they may still contain some insight.
These curved paths contain deviation from the core logic and the higher the deviation the
more the thoughts become illogical, non-sensical, emotional, non-scientific, etc.
Note: In mathematics, a manifold is a topological space that locally resembles Euclidean
space.
While logical sequences of thought are considered to be straight lines with a direction and
magnitude (vectors), the shape of the entire thought structure, or the thought manifold,
begins to show more complexity when viewed at a larger scale.
At the zoomed-in level, purely logical structures  follow straight lines. But as we zoom out,
these sequences can begin to curve  even though each local segment still appears linear .
This happens when multiple logical vectors stack up(in series and/or in parallel) to represent
something more complex and abstract.
Note that logical sequences of thoughts can be considered as eigenvectors , that is, they retain
their direction even when the environment around them changes (under transformations).
This is what gives them the ability to stay stable situations without losing coherence. An eigen-
thought is like a principle: it holds true, even as the context shifts.
Limiting Curve of Logic
Limiting curve of Logic defines special boundary structures in thought space, points where
conventional logical progression breaks or loops back on itself.
These special cases include:
A singularity refers to a point where a physical quantity (like density or curvature) becomes
infinite, or where the equations describing a system break down27.
These structures behave like singularities  in the awareness vector field(more on that later) -
regions where traditional logical flow becomes undefined, rotational, or recursive. They are
essential in mapping the boundaries of rational thought .
So, as per Axiom 3, we have that, given thought space T and the singularities defined by
limiting curve of logic L3, the resultant thought space is continuous if and only if that resultant
thought space is T-{L3}
Thought space and Physical Space
We have considered thought space as a part of semi-physical space, a space which is on the
limiting edge of physical space, where laws of nature are challenged and the extreme
possibilities emerge.
Bohm postulated that thought is distributed and non localized like quantum entities.32
In physics, quantum refers to the smallest discrete unit of any physical property , such as energyIn contrast, non-logical structures  (like emotional, paradoxical, or contradictory thought
patterns) do not follow clear straight paths at any scale. They're messy , tangled, often self-
referential, forming shapes that are dif ficult to classify . These might loop, fold back, or
cluster into dense regions, creating local turbulence in the manifold.
Then there are mixed structures ; logical thoughts tangled with emotional or illogical ones.
These are the most common and the hardest to describe. They don’t align with one
direction or one geometry . They can be smooth in places and chaotic in others, kind of like
fractals.
So overall, the thought manifold  is not flat. It's made of straight lines, curves, and
singularities, depending on what kind of structure is being observed.
Circular Thought (Eg. A⟹ B and B⟹ A)
Paradoxical Thought (Eg. This statement is False)
Contradictory Thought (Eg. A∩¬A)
or angular momentum.
Hence, as a speculation, consider thoughts to be quantum in nature. This idea also arose from
Roger Penrose and Stuart Hamerof f's theory(Orchestrated Objective Reduction) that there is a
possibility of existence of quantum phenomena in the brain. The phenomena has been
hypothesized to be possible in microtubules inside the brain9. This is considered to be the origin
of consciousness.
This would imply that there would be the possibility of quantum entanglement and quantum
superposition.
Quantum superposition: Thoughts can be considered to be in a state of superposition until they
are observed by an observer(more on this topic later). Then they collapse into a definite state(in
Language space), similar to how it is in the wavefunction collapse theory . See image below .
Note that the collapse can also be described using mathematical projection of the thought
space (higher dimension) to Language space(lower dimension).
Quantum Entanglement: Thoughts may under certain conditions, exhibit entanglement, that is,
a form of instantaneous correlation across large distances. If such entanglement is possible in
the thought space, it could provide a basis for understanding intuition, sudden alignment of
thoughts between 2 individuals without any direct communication or synchronicity(more on this
later).
Interpretation
How are events connected via thought space?
Given time t=t and t= t+ δt, an Event is said to occur during that period δt.10
Definition
For this event E, an Interpretation is defined as a curve joining 2 points in Thought space which
define the event from how it began to how it ended.
It is interesting to note that the occurrence of the event can be interpreted in more than 1 way ,
leading up to an infinite number of interpretations, that is, geometrically speaking, an infinite
number of curves from the point A( to point B(see figure above).
It may then be defined that while infinite number of possibilities are considerable, the curve
must approach the displacement(shortest path from A to B) to achieve the most accurate
interpretations.
However , note that this may not work in regions where the Limiting Curve of Logic theory is
applicable.
This does not imply that only the interpretations that are the most logical (those closely
approaching the straight line) are always the best or most accurate descriptions of an event.
It depends on the event and the context.
Sometimes, interpretations that are more emotional, abstract, or poetic, which may not follow
the straight logical path at all, end up describing the event much better .
Especially in situations where logic falls short(see Limiting curve of logic), or where the
experience is subjective or symbolic, these “curved path” interpretations can actually carry more
meaning.
Definition : An Experience is an input of information, that is, structured data through one or
more senses of an observer . We will be rigorously defining what an observer is later on. This
information is received from the observer's environment and processed by its brain, allowing
the environment to be observed as it is seems to be(at least what is limited through our senses
for that matter).
At the same time, as interpretations formed in thought space and translated into language are
inherently dualistic, it may be that an absolute form of interpretations may not exist in the
Thought space.
It is also worthwhile noting that the most accurate and concise interpretations must be the ones
that asymptotically approach displacement such as mathematics and logic and as we move
further towards the common language, the longer and less relatively accurate the interpretation
becomes.
The obvious consequence of an inaccurate interpretation is that a high number of perspectives
can be applied to consider equivalent candidates to the interpretation(interpretations of
interpretations), often causing mass confusion and resulting in the loss of meaning.
Having discussed quite a bit on interpretations, we now look at the actual space where these
interpretations reside: the Language Space.
Language Space
We understand that Thoughts are converted into Language before they are spoken. W e
sometimes also use language to process our thoughts.
Hence there must be a translation function for the energy that is in the form of Thoughts to a
form which is more comprehensible and communicable, which is, Language.
Thought space contains abstract energies which can then be converted into language using the
translation mapping.
This translation mapping may be a part of how the brain functions or operates.
Thought space is generalized and abstracted as compared to language.
For example. The words "boy"(English), "garçon"(French) and " लड़का " (Hindi) can be reverse
mapped from language to thought space to the section that represents a young, male, human
being, that is, they point to the same set of energies representing what in English is the concept
of a boy .
This implies that the translation mapping is a one-to-many relation.
Language, being part of a dualistic universe is consequently dualistic. Making a statement
means denying its negative.
For example: Statement "A  is True" implicitly states that "Not-A  is False".
This shows that language is limited. It can only express things in dualistic terms, whereas,
structure of consciousness may operate in a more non-dual sense.
“The mathematical structure of language space is still under development and requires further
clarification, especially in terms of its mapping from thought space.
Next, we will discuss our longest topic where everything gets tied together in one final act:
Awareness.
3.Awareness
Awareness exists as a distributed field over Thought space as well as Physical space.
This suggests Awareness is fundamental.
Awareness is unevenly distributed across the Universe.
Local concentration centers of Awareness are called Observers11.
These concentration centers interact with both the Thought space and the Physical space, one
may even consider them to be a bridge between the two(For example. The phrase 'Y our
thoughts create your reality')12.
Observers might emerge where physical and informational complexity reaches a threshold
(Example. A brain).
This aligns with how stars or blackholes form: Gravitational collapse of matter into dense cores
or collapse of Awareness into structured complexity . Which is why , we're going to try and see
what happens if we model Awareness as a vector field, similar to how gravity works.
Awareness modelled as a Vector Field
In physics, a field is a physical quantity that has a value for every point in space and time13.
A vector field is a function that assigns a vector to each point in a space14.
A vector is a quantity that has both magnitude(size or length) and direction.
The red circle is a collapsed thought as the observer is nearby and the awareness field is
directed towards the red thought. This image has been created using python.
Let A(x) be the field.
This implies that at every point on the field, it has a magnitude and direction13.
Vectors within the field can be added, subtracted and multiplied by a scalar .
A(x) may be rotational or irrotational.
If A(x) is rotational, A0
Q. When is A(x) rotational?
Ans: Near Singularities. This models phenomena like obsessive thought loops, circular logic,
paradox etc.
For a sink in the field: A<0
For a source in the field: A>0
For the field underlying logical, scientific, mathematical spaces: A=0
An observer is a True sink/source of the Awareness field(both in Physical as well as thought
space).
A hallucination is a False sink/source of the Awareness field(only in thought space).
Observers with access only to physical space are semi-sink/semi-source(Eg. Bugs)
Synchronicity
There are two types of Events that are possible. Causal and Acausal. Scientific laws suf fice in
explaining the causal events. However , we also have acausal events.
Now, what is Acausality? W ell, we know that if causality is Cause implies Ef fect and Negation of
causality is acausality , then Acausality , by conceptual inversion, is the occurrence of an ef fect in
the absence of a cause. But how can something happen if nothing caused it to happen?
Well, there is a way this is possible:
Now, there’ s a special category of Acausal events that may satisfy the above property , that is,
there may be faster than the speed of light information exchange.
These types of events are called synchronistic events.This will look like parallel lines.
Parallel lines indicate the same line of logic as it's a vector field so as long as magnitude
and direction are the same, vector traversal is possible, that is, same logic can be applied
to different events across space and time .
Beyond Physical Constraints : In physics, by the general theory of relativity , we know that
nothing or no information can travel faster than the speed of light at a physical level. This
means an event that occurs due to any semi-physical causes could, in theory , be
instantaneous, surpassing the space-time boundaries and therefore, not be bound by
causality and thus, acausal.
Note: Synchronistic events may not be acausal if they're quantum in nature. At this point, it is
worth noting that Harald Atmanspacher , a prominent theorist of dual-aspect monism, has
argued that quantum entanglement might underlie phenomena similar to Jung’ s synchronicity—
meaningful correlations not explained by direct causal interaction29. As discussed earlier , if
thoughts are quantum in nature, then due to the phenomenon of Quantum Entanglement, there
may exist a correlation between the thoughts of dif ferent observers. These entangled thoughts
could, in theory , upon observation and collapse, generate synchronistic events. This could
explain shared intuition or sudden alignment of thoughts between 2 individuals without any
direct communication. Also, quantum entanglement requires prior interaction. This can be
explained by revising the definition we used for observers. They are concentration centers of
awareness and awareness is a field. The dif ferent observers are not fundamentally separate,
they're localized expressions  of the same field. This means, in one form or the other , it is
possible that their substructures interacted at some point in the past. However , for the purposes
of this article, we will assume that synchronicity is acausal.
History
The term synchronicity  was coined by the Swiss psychiatrist Carl Jung, who also coined the
terms introvert and extravert. Jung developed this concept in collaboration with the Austrian
physicist W olfgang Pauli, one of the pioneers in Quantum Mechanics.15
Explanation
Now, synchronicity based events are ones which in retrospect can have some personal
meaning which can be assigned to them.
These can be simple enough like you having the same thought as your friend at the same time
or life-changing ones like bumping into the right person at the right place at the right time. This
may included observing of signs that have subjective meaning assigned to them by the
observer .
There’ s no apparent cause to these events and yet in retrospect, they may result in a
meaningful conversation or something that diverges you to an entirely dif ferent path in life.
Basis
If we assume that an event can be either causal or acausal, and on the basis of that claim that
these acausal events can be synchronistic, then we must arrive at the question: What is the
basis for these synchronicity based events?
Here, we will discuss one possibility , however , there could be many beyond our imagination.
We know that all matter is energy(by Einstein's famous equation =mc2). Extending this idea,
we infer that all semi-matter or the unit of matter for semi-physical plane is also energy such as
the space of thoughts.
Energy has a wavelength and we know that waves can only interact if they’re of similar
wavelength.
A perfect example of this would be that due to the large dif ference in wavelength, radio waves
pass through walls.
Hence, it is acceptable to assume that thoughts also only interact when they resonate at similar
wavelengths or frequency .
Hence, an acausal event may occur by synchronicity due to interaction of thoughts leading to
say an encounter or a conversation between two or more observers.
In simple language, it is said that we tend to meet people similar in thinking to ours.
Flow of Nature
Up till now , we have that:
It is a concept borrowed from 2 dif ferent sources in history .
Assuming that all units of data are indistinguishable and each has the property of Awareness,
we may infer that the natural flow may occur in the direction of purifying every single point to
maximize its awareness.
This can consequently be applied to high complexity structures, such as the physical and semi-
physical bodies(the identity) of observers, which infers that the purpose of the observer with
respect to their surroundings is to accord oneself to the Flow of Nature and maximize
awareness of the (observer , environment) system. This is similar to the ideas given by both of
the aforementioned authors and display an interesting connection between the philosophy of
the East and the W est.
Note that awareness might fluctuate at a local level(increasing non-monotonically).
Flow of nature creates synchronicities which are events which increase the awareness of the
observer and their local environment.Since Awareness is distributed unevenly in space, and it tends to increase in time, we can
consider the universe to have an Awareness Gradient(always pointing in the direction of the
higher awareness).
Observers move through degrees of awareness, shaped by their thoughts and experiences.
This may not be completely random, that is, it is directed towards a sense of clarity . Hence,
there's a direction in which one thinks or one's thoughts flow .
This tendency for thoughts to evolve and awareness to increase implies the existence of a
natural flow which we'll call the Flow of Nature.
From the East, Laozi, (4th century BC), Tao Te Ching16
From the W est, Marcus Aurelius, (170 AD), Meditations
The mathematics of the Natural Flow are not in the scope of this essay . We take the workings of
the flow for granted here.
Attachmental Events
In contrast to synchronistic events, which may be acausal and aligned with the flow of nature,
Attachmental events are those events caused by the observers that are born out of their
attachment to the physical world. These events are causal, though their origin in the thoughts
may be acausal.
For example. Craving for food vs hunger . While hunger is a physical event caused by natural
laws, the feeling we get when our stomach is empty or we need energy from food, a craving for
food is a false event that makes us feel like we're hungry and we eat out of leisure rather than
out of necessity .
These events disrupt the flow of nature. They create unnecessary physical interactions which
disaccord the observer from the flow by making unnecessary connections at the physical level.
These attachmental events are caused by attachments to the material world and are the cause
of suf fering as described by Gautama Buddha from the philosophy of Buddhism.
These attachments are rooted in desires, fears and identities.
Dimensions
A Dimension is a defining characteristic in a given space.17
The set of all dimensions define every possible characteristic in the given space.
Length, width, height are the 3 dimensions of the physical space.18
Time is the 4th dimension in physics. W e will keep that as a reference to observe how events
evolve and unfold at both physical and semi-physical level.
However , when we go to the semi-physical space, we have that:
The semi-physical space has a finite number of possible dimensions  if and only if the
observable Universe can be defined  in the Language space.
Regardless, to define an event in the universe, we only need a subspace of the semi-physical
space, that is, a space with dimension less than that of the semi-physical space.
For example: A dimension can be a health characteristic wherein health characteristics of an
observer is a subspace.19
Dimensions in a subspace are independent of each other .22 If one dimension depended on one
or more dimensions, one would be able to represent that dimension in terms of other ones. This
is called a linearly dependent subspace. In our case, for maximizing simplification, we have that
all the dimensions are linearly independent or independent of each other .
However , we can have that between two subspaces, one or more dimensions may be common.
Example: Health and beauty . A common dimension/ characteristic between them is Skin clarity .
From a health  perspective, clear skin often indicates proper nutrition, hydration, and
hormonal balance.
Observer
We've discussed that Awareness is the property of matter and semi-matter (for physical and
semi-physical space) that increases with time.
Awareness is unevenly distributed throughout the Universe, ie, there exist concentration
centers of awareness which are local volumes in < n-dimensional spaces(where n is the highest
dimension in the universe, n∈) with the highest degree of Awareness.
These concentration centers are commonly known as observers.20
An Observer is a < n-dimensional manifestation of the Natural Flow that has a physical form as
well as a concentrated Thought space structure (commonly known as ego or identity).
These forms may be animated.
These observer-forms may operate at distinct frequencies, and when resonant with aspects of
their environment, they influence the local conditions, potentially giving rise to events.
Events such as a conversation are an exchange of energy , (sound energy at the physical level
and thought-based energy at the semi-physical) leading to a gaining of a new experience,
thought energy-based memories, and an increment (if only partial) of local awareness in the
observer .
Concentration centers or Observers can access Physical Space as well as Thought Space.
Thoughts are higher dimensional shapes in Awareness field, localized around observers.
The Physical world is perceivable by the 5 senses. However , observers can also experience the
Thought space and therefore perceive thoughts as well, either local to them (self or identity) orFrom a beauty  perspective, clear skin is widely regarded as an aesthetic ideal.
We can have other subspaces which are a defining property for mental states as well.
Example. Happy-Sad, Good-Bad etc.
The semi-physical spaces are generally used to interpret the experience that we gain from
the physical space.
Note that each of these subspaces exist in a continuous spectrum as well(eg. how happy
one is) instead of a dualistic view of these mental states where either one is only happy or
only sad(black and white or binary view). While a clear line of distinction does exist between
the two, and most observers may be able to identify it within themselves or another
observer , these may be illusive, not to mention deceptive. Overall, one must observe that
the so-called positives and negatives of these subspaces exist only in contrast to each other
and not independently on their own. Hence, by observing them non-dualistically , an
observer is able to detach themselves from the polarization of happiness-sadness and exist
in a neutral state(something we'll discuss later).
non-local (such as by communication).
Observers can absorb and reflect upon Thought based energies. They can also respond to
energy by converting (or mapping) it to physical input and responding to it.
Here, Thought space is the domain and the range is any of the physical senses.21
Lifetime of an Observer
The thought or mental state of an observer during any given interval are described by an event
occurring in relation to the observer and are observable by their reaction to the event. This is
referred to as an observer's behavior .23
Lifetime:  An observer has a physical lifetime during which the observer experiences events
and reacts to them. Interactions generate Energy . Interactions of any form, be it movement,
activity , work or interaction with another observer , (even breathing is an activity). This leads to
an influx of observable Energy by the observer leading to generation of emotions and thoughts
leading to further events which leads one to an Energy-Event generation cycle.
Note: This is again a dualistic frame of reference and is generalized to the cyclical logic format
under Limiting curve of logic.
While a common observer may remain unaware of the process or the direction in which Energy-
Event cycles occur . The events occur , as we've discussed before (at least the synchronistic
one), to consequently maximize awareness of observer-environment pair .
During this lifetime, the observer's physical and semi-physical states evolve.
Death:  When an observer has achieved a suf ficient amount of growth with respect to their
surroundings, and the evolution of self-environment combination (which also contains other
observers) has crossed a threshold beyond which the growth rate has reduced to a negligible
value, the observer "dies". This death marks the final physical event in the lifetime of the
observer and the mental configuration transfers to another point in spacetime where a "rebirth"
may occur .
Observer as a Simplex
As discussed before, for an n-dimensional universe, an Observer is a < n-dimensional structure
of Awareness parameter .
A simplex is a shape consisting of n+1 points in an n-dimensional space of the n dimensions (n
being the highest dimension) + 1 more point.24
Eg. A line with 3 points in a plane can be converted to a triangle or 2d shape, ie, a simplex in
higher dimensions.
The purpose of the lifetime of an observer is the conversion of an Observer into a Simplex by
decreasing the number of points in each of the lower dimensions allowing them access to
higher dimensions by increment of the Awareness of each of these points in the structure.
An observer consisting of n+1 points in some m<n dimension is guided by the Natural Flow to
acquire the property of a simplex by raising its dimension (or form) to become an n-dimensional
simplex (over several lifetimes).
The (n1)th point represents the direction/specialization/specification of an observer .
Mental Inertia
Due to an embedded form of inertia, existing at the local semi-physical level af fecting the
awareness of an Observer , one has the tendency to create an overdependence on a subset
defined over the Physical space and the Thought space due to localized familiarity(set of
positive experiences from a set of previous points in time), and the otherwise infinite nature of
reality , which may be overwhelming to one that is inexperienced with it.
A consequence to this unfamiliarity is that the observer builds up a mental shell of thoughts that
can be assumed to be “true” in the most cases. These are commonly known as beliefs.
This results in a loss of dynamism, a stagnancy of connections between the observer and the
environment and ultimately reduces the local increment of awareness under the time
parameter .
However , just as reference frames are defined, they can again be reduced to an undefined
state from which an observer can acquire input from a relatively integrated environment.
This may be correlated with loss of temporal identity , temporarily , but over time with some
adjustment and familiarity with the process, one can identify the core of undefining a frame of
reference.
Consequently , one can observe the same environment but in a drastically dif ferent
sense(dif ferent set of perspectives), as an integration results in observation of the same object
or observation of the same memory but with a dif ferent set of perspectives applied.
Remolding of an observer into a simplex
The consequence of the occurrence of each synchronistic event during the lifetime of an
observer results in the reconfiguration of an observer ’s identity which results in a shift in the
degree of Awareness parameter of the observer .
This occurs when a satisfactory degree of “reflection” occurs within the observer resulting in the
observer ’s change of priorities, beliefs, views, etc.
Reflection is the experience of events by an observer that have occurred previously in time in
its proximity . The dif ference is, these experiences are at the thought level instead of the
physical level. Reflection happens regularly , in one way or the other , and it happens
automatically . It is how observers process and generate insights about its environment and
becomes familiar with it. Reflection is also a part of how the reference frames are applied (both
physical and thought) in the observer's view of its environment.
These events, guided by the flow , result in what may be observed as a remolding of the
observer .
This remolding depends on the malleability of the observer which is inversely proportional to
one’s Mental Inertia.
Realization of the concept of Non-duality , or the dissolution of the self is the first and the main
step that is consistently repeated that allows for the change of beliefs or remolding of the ego.
Consequently , as the remolding occurs, the observer attains a degree of wholeness as it slowly
becomes one with the universe(dissolution or destruction of ego).
This results in a lower dependence on materialistic substances and this defines a freedom for
the observer to access and connect with higher dimensional thoughts. The observer is able to
gain access across dimensions (lower and higher) as it achieves higher degrees of freedom
and consequently achieves the property of a simplex wherein there still exists a connection with
the lower dimensions, without as much dependence on them.
The higher dimensions being less materialistic have more to do with thoughts, emotions and
one’s state of mind.
This results in an inner balance, a sort of peace and tranquility wherein one is more in accord
with the flow .
Similarities with Jungian Theory
The above discussed ideas are similar to Jung's theory of individuation and his ideas of
confrontation with the unconscious.
The observer experiences, reflects upon and reacts appropriately to each situation.
What exactly is reflection? That needs to be defined. It is a reconnection to the energies of a
predated event that the observer experienced. These can be day-to-day events or ones that
happened long ago. It is also possible that the reconnection to the energies are from those that
the observer experienced in previous lifetimes.
Through the lifetimes, what may change is the physical and mental configurations, but the
structure of the awareness may remain the same. This is, of course, only true assuming the
concept of rebirth is real.
Each of these reflections is a confrontation with the unconscious and it remolds the observer
into a simplex-like structure or in other terms, the observer "individuates".
Finding Awareness
Consequently , the most well fit in beings are the ones with highest awareness, are in the
highest degree of harmony with their environment or the nature and at the top of the chain.
This, however , does not necessarily implicate the basis of evolution as it is traditionally
considered to be. Being at the top of the food chain was a consequence of intelligence for
humans, which is a consequence of Awareness. That is, intelligence is a subset of awareness.
One may be excelling in the area of intelligence but may not so much with awareness and self-
awareness.
Self-awareness is simply awareness of one's self, identity , ego etc.
Being well fit in the society implicates the temporally bound basis such as wealth and influence
rather than timeless bases such as humility and wisdom which, again, are a consequence of
awareness. This is because humility and wisdom have a larger and more static basis for
awareness, whereas, the basis for wealth and influence are dynamic and smaller . That is, they
are less likely to work as a basis for evolution with respect to the former traits.
To assume that there exists an absolute basis for maximizing awareness results in mental
inertia and a dualistic approach to thoughts where one chooses a side of a dual as opposed to
its contrast. A neutral stance, guided only by the flow , leads to a relatively more refined way for
existence, for which a dynamic basis is inherent.
A neutral stance is, by definition, similar to an agnostic stance towards existence, however , it
takes it one step further . Instead of holding onto absolute beliefs, it adopts a probabilistic
attitude toward reality .
While classical belief systems rely on fixed truths(especially in religions, where in the extreme
cases, all decisions are classified strictly as right or wrong) , this approach stays open,
adaptable, and grounded in uncertainty .
Awareness as God (Probably)
Consider the three classical omni-properties  often used to describe God in religious or
philosophical traditions:
Now, we consider Awareness.Omnipresence
Omniscience
Omnipotence
1. Omnipresence : In an n-dimensional space, Awareness is defined as a field that occupies
and flows through all dimensions. It exists at every point, though not uniformly . In that
sense, Awareness is omnipresent , it is present in everything, even if not everything is
equally aware.
Possible solution to the Combination problem
Given that we have taken a stance in this model similar to that of panpsychism (see Axiom 2),
we may consider tackling the combination problem  of panpsychism within our framework.
The combination problem asks how the consciousness of fundamental, simple entities, such as
electrons, can combine to form the complex consciousness of higher-level entities, like humans.
Leading philosophers have highlighted the dif ficulty in explaining how micro-consciousnesses
merge without being lost. Our approach of fers a possible resolution:
The Mergence of Experience
The individual electron’ s experience does not disappear  during combination. Rather , the
mergence of experiences gives rise to an experience of non-duality , that is, the sense of being
oneness with the environment. During this non-dual state, the whole system experiences a
moment of self-awareness, while the parts continue to maintain their individual experiences.
The parts are naturally inclined toward non-dual experiences because these align with the flow
of nature  and the local maximization of awareness . This experience of non-duality can be
equated with the temporary destruction of identity or ego . Although it may seem strange to
consider electrons having an ego, if they possess existence and consciousness, they carry
some form of awareness. The awareness field  behaves analogously to gravity , but in thought
space , where thought is the matter being attracted. The stronger the awareness field in a given
location (that is, bigger the concentration center), the more thoughts it attracts.
Interestingly , the more microscopic the entity , the more likely it is to experience non-duality , as
smaller entities are less bound by localized identities and more aligned with the natural flow .2. Omniscience : Awareness is not bound by linear time. It exists in the now , but also connects
to the past (through memory , reflection) and potential futures (through intention,
anticipation). Since it is the medium through which experience occurs, it carries within it the
imprint of everything that has been experienced. Therefore, it holds the possibility of
omniscience , not as factual knowledge, but as direct experiential knowing.
3. Omnipotence : Awareness underlies all structures, both thought-based and physical. Its
concentration centers (observers) may exhibit something like free will, arising when local
awareness crosses a certain threshold. Still, the larger field of Awareness moves through all
things via the Flow of Nature , subtly influencing events and guiding change. In this way ,
Awareness has the potential to act as it wills , and can therefore be interpreted as
omnipotent  within its own domain.
Taken together , these properties suggest that what has historically been called "God" may ,
in this framework, be understood as Awareness itself , not as a personified deity , but as the
fundamental field that experiences, shapes, and connects all things.
Mechanism of Fusion
The "how" of mergence can be understood as a fusion process : the individual and collective
experiences coexist. Fusion of consciousness has been explored in various philosophical and
mystical traditions, and our model extends this idea to fundamental entities.
Awareness exists as a field in the psychophysical neutral domain , while ego is simply a
collection of “I-position” thoughts(Hubert Hermans). An electron in a non-dual state experiences
a condition analogous to higher human consciousness, but without the same level of
complexity .
Structural Organization
The flow of nature  guides awareness to form increasingly complex structures. Rather than
each mind being strictly localized, we posit a mental space  (subset of the psychophysical
neutral space) and a mind field  (subset of the awareness field), an idea posed by John Eccles.
At each concentration center of awareness, there exists an experiencer capable of engaging
with mental space.
Greater awareness at these centers enables deeper experiences , and multiple concentration
centers can combine and fuse  to form structures with more unified, integrated experiences .
Therefore, in totality , there is no problem of “too many minds”  as all are part of a singular
field of consciousness.
Emergent Properties and Laws of Fusion
While there is no precise law of fusion yet, the process is reminiscent of human experiences of
non-duality . A meaningful event (whether a synchronicity or other resonance) occurs when
thoughts resonate between the experiencer and the experience . This happens when the
thoughts are of similar frequency , as discussed earlier . This resonance amplifies the
experience’ s intensity , generating a sense of greater energetic connection with the whole .
Ego Inflation and Awareness Concentration
Localized awareness fields, such as those associated with electrons, may create mild egoic
tendencies , akin to a gravitational pull on selfhood. These are not identities in the full human
sense, but represent primitive “I-experiences” concentrated at points of awareness.
Testing and Empirical Challenges
Testing this model is inherently dif ficult. However , the role of entanglement  in fusing awareness
or synchronistic experiences could provide a testable avenue in principle. This is because a
non-dual experience is a synchronistic event and according to Harald Atmanspacher ,
synchronicity may be the macroscopic form of quantum entanglement.
However , it is also interesting to note that there are accounts of non-dualistic experiences
throughout history . From the eastern philosophies of Hinduism, Taoism and Buddhism to the
western philosophy of Nietzsche, Schopenhauer and the Christian mystic Meister Eckhart,
these accounts are spread throughout the world's history with dif ferent names. Some of these
experiences may be union with god, spiritual awakening, the experience of Zen,
Moksh(liberation), enlightenment etc.
Open Questions
The exact mechanisms of structural organization  and the emergence of complex, hierarchical
consciousness remain mysterious. Nevertheless, the framework suggests that the combination
problem may not be a paradox after all: the individual and collective experiences coexist,
resonate, and fuse in ways that reflect both unity and multiplicity .
Note that Annaka Harris has published a similar solution regarding the dissolution of self and
consciousness as a field in the Journal of Consciousness Studies(2021).
4.Conclusion
So, we have discussed many things in this essay .
We defined consciousness, then we moved on to Non-duality and its components, we
discussed integrated sets and reference frames and then we concluded that the Universe is an
Integrated Set.
We then moved on to Thought Space and its structure and how it works, what paths between
thoughts look like, and how logic flows through it. The Limiting Curve of Logic gave us
singularity zones where logic breaks down, like paradoxes or circular thinking. These are
important and further research may be required on this topic to understand these singularities
better .
Next, we discuss the possibility that thoughts may be quantum in nature, we discussed Orch-
OR, Quantum Entanglement and Superposition.
Afterwards, we discussed Interpretations and moved on to Language space from there.
Finally , we arrived at Awareness and discussed several topics including Awareness as a field,
Synchronicity , Flow of Nature, and finally Observer , the one who experiences, transforms, and
gives meaning to all of this. W e have also discussed this model's similarities with the Jungian
Theory of Individuation, the idea of awareness as God, and finally , we attempted to solve the
combination problem of Panpsychism using our model.
This theory is still a work in progress. The previous research on the topic of consciousness is
not highly relatable as this has been approached from an entirely dif ferent direction while using
some of the terms from dif ferent subjects. W e used knowledge we gained from Physics, Math,
Philosophy , Religion and Psychology .
While this theory still contains loopholes, the hope of the author is to generate interest in the
above topics so that more people are inspired to explore them further by researching,
questioning, and understanding these ideas more deeply and thoroughly .
This is because if consciousness is really at the root of everything, then understanding it isn't
just interesting, it might be the most important thing we ever do.
References:
1. Tononi, G. (2008). Integrated information theory . .
2. Quora. (n.d.). Is everything made of consciousness?  Retrieved from
https://www .quora.com/Is-everything-made-of-consciousness
3. Kant, I. (1781). Critique of Pure Reason  (N. Kemp Smith, Trans.). London: Macmillan.
(Original work published in 1781)
4. Vyasa. (n.d.). Bhagavad Gita . Retrieved from https://www .holy-bhagavad-gita.org/
5. Eckhart, M. (1994). Meister Eckhart: Selected writings  (O. Davies, Trans.). London:
Penguin.
6. Nietzsche, F . (1872). The birth of tragedy . [Publisher , translator if any].
7. Quora. (n.d.). What does "frame of reference" mean in simple words?  Retrieved from
https://www .quora.com/
8. ScienceDirect. (n.d.). Feature integration theory . Retrieved from
https://www .sciencedirect.com/topics/neuroscience/feature-integration-theory
9. ScienceDaily . (2014, January 16). How the brain encodes time and place: A neural link
between memory and navigation . Retrieved from
https://www .sciencedaily .com/releases/2014/01/1401 16085105.htm
10. Chegg. (n.d.). Poisson process problem . Retrieved from https://www .chegg.com/ ...
11. Reddit. (n.d.). Observer: The concentration center of awareness . Retrieved from
https://www .reddit.com/r/consciousness/comments/ ...
12. Reiki Amazes. (n.d.). Can thoughts change reality?  Retrieved from
https://reikiamazes.com/ ...
13. Minini, A. (n.d.). Vector field . Retrieved from https://www .andreaminini.net/math/vector-field
14. CliffsNotes. (n.d.). Retrieved from https://www .cliffsnotes.com/study-notes/26894455
15. Reddit. (n.d.). Synchronicity: Meaningful events connecting lives . Retrieved from
https://www .reddit.com/r/Jung/comments/ ...
16. Taoistic.com. (n.d.). Tao Te Ching by Laozi . Retrieved from
https://www .taoistic.com/taoteching-laotzu
17. GD&T  Basics. (n.d.). What are basic dimensions and how do they work in GD&T?  Retrieved
from https://www .gdandtbasics.com/ ...
18. American Museum of Natural History . (n.d.). Thinking in three dimensions . Retrieved from
https://www .amnh.org/explore/ology/ ...
19. Bazett, T. (n.d.). Finding the dimension of a subspace  [Video]. YouTube. Retrieved from
https://www .youtube.com/watch?v=T oEWOTlvaY o
20. Duplicate of #1 1.
21. Khan Academy . (n.d.). Domain and range from graphs . Retrieved from
https://www .khanacademy .org/math/algebra/ ...
22. Quora. (n.d.). How do you find the dimension of a subspace?  Retrieved from
https://www .quora.com/ ...
23. Brainly . (n.d.). [Math question page] . Retrieved from https://brainly .com/question/37814372
24. Banchof f, T. (n.d.). Beyond the third dimension: Hypercube . Brown University . Retrieved
from https://www .math.brown.edu/tbanchof/Beyond3d/chapter4/section06.html
25. Rudin, W alter. Principles of Mathematical Analysis , 3rd Edition. McGraw-Hill, 1976.
26. Halmos, Paul R.  Naive Set Theory . Springer , 1960.
27. Hawking, Stephen, and Ellis, G.F .R.
The Large Scale Structure of Space-T ime_, Cambridge University Press, 1973.
28. Rosen, Kenneth H.
Discrete Mathematics and Its Applications , 7th Edition. McGraw-Hill, 2012.
Section 2.3:
Definitions and examples of injective (one-to-one), surjective (onto), and bijective
functions.
29. Atmanspacher , Harald & Fuchs, C. A.
The Pauli–Jung Conjecture and Its Impact T oday . Imprint Academic, 2014.
- Discusses the connection between quantum entanglement and Jung’s concept of
synchronicity through dual-aspect monism.s
30. Jung, C. G. (1953/1967). Two Essays on Analytical Psychology  (R. F . C. Hull, Trans.).
Princeton University Press.
Explores individuation as the integration of conscious and unconscious psychic
elements through meaningful confrontation.
31. Wheeler , J. A. (1990). Information, physics, quantum: The search for links . In W . Zurek
(Ed.), Complexity , Entropy and the Physics of Information (pp. 3–28). Addison-W esley .
- Introduces the "It from Bit" hypothesis: the idea that every physical thing
("it") derives its function and existence from binary choices ("bit").
32. Prideaux, Jeff.
Comparison between Karl Pribram's "Holographic Brain Theory" and More Conventional
Models of Neuronal Computation . American Computer Science Association (T echnical
Report). Retrieved from http://www .acsa2000.net/bcngroup/jponkp/
Introduces the holonomic brain theory and discusses how episodic information may be
distributed across the brain through holographic transformations, based on the work of
Karl Pribram.
