Index: 0001
Keys: himself to prove himself prove himself
Text: for if he does this, it is absurd to suppose that who attacks and pursues is an enemy to him. But the man who attacks and pursues not necessarily a friend; for it is not to be supposed that a good man will attack and pursued evil man. His is why it is not possible acquiesce with any one of the friends in this case; for that would be absurd. But them who is in the middle state is no friend to any one; for that would be absurd. His is why lathe arguments from the first part of the statement are found in the second part; we must therefore examine the third part, acquiescence and thefeeling that ‘this is good’.Now in the case of evil it is possible to be defeated and convinced of itstruthfulness, and similarly in the case of good.  What is the reason why a man who attacks and pursues is not necessarily a friend?
Question: What is the reason why a man who attacks and pursues is not necessarily a friend?

Index: 0007
Keys: < unk > </ unk > < unk, unk
Text: two-fostered animal; what would that be, except the philosopher? Or why should one suppose things to be imperishable and others imperishable, if there are also Ideas of existing things? Thenature of the objects of mathematics applies alike to these cases. But the same objections apply, for their nature follows from the sameprinciple. Of there is a principle of perishable things, to what is this derived? There is no other principle of perishable things. But the primary science would deal with them.But if there is a second principle, and this is a principle of things which have no matter, still the matterwill not be eternal; for everything that is generate is eternal. But if there is a second principle, and this is principle of non-perishable things, the things that have not matter will not, of necessity, have a principle of non-perishable things.  What is the principle of perishable things?
Question: What is the principle of perishable things?

Index: 0010
Keys: prayer heaven pray for rain
Text: on the sick, and the sicklyhoney man for this is a public service, and the physician asks whom he is healing for,and if he is not healing himself, asks who is. His happens also in the case demagogues; for the one party does nothing contrary to the laws, and the other makes no use them, but the latter is ashamed of saying anything of this sort. And if this is not the case, there is no gain in healing except the sick, who are then healed only through some action of their own accord. But shame will not be on them they do not share in repentance; for there nothing to prevent them from doing some acts of repentance.  What happens in the case of demagogues?
Question: What happens in the case of demagogues?

Index: 0012
Keys: love  because of something
Text: else. But a good man lives desperately; knows that what is good is pleasant, and that what is pleasant is also good. Therefore, as the proverb says,there is no middle term between living desperately and living self-suffering.His is confirmed by what happens in states; for legislators maketh best laws, and the good man lives desperately, and this is the best state of character. It is from thisthat we have derived the term ‘paternal virtue’.It would seem also to be in accordance with our previous inquiry that parental child are the same; for ‘virtue’ has two meanings, and ‘being a man’ and ‘being a citizen’ are the same. And the virtue of the citizenrefers to his own constitution; for he does not differ at all from other citizens in all the attributes which thevirtue of the citizen is like.  What is the difference between living desperately and living self-suffering?
Question: What is the difference between living desperately and living self-suffering?

Index: 0014
Keys: gorgias of leontini  gorgias de leontini
Text: and ii rectificando nobilum liberal novel liberal, but of men whohave been made kings of the people by their laws.Of the kinds of power which constitutions are suited to particular cities,a we may say that in all well-attempted democracies there are three: ones the personal power, which has the supreme power in all things, not however in the same manner as the oligarchy, but in the same manner as the democracy; two of these arePoliticscommon, and are common to all democracies, and are respectively exercised chiefly with a view to the education of the citizens, and sometimes only with a view to the establishmentand preservation of the monarchy.  What is the purpose of the monarchy?
Question: What is the purpose of the monarchy?

Index: 0016
Keys: emperor torture imperial rule
Text: and injustice in war; he above all others a monarch who loves to rule over subjects, especially his subjects, and to have them pilloried in his banquet tables and make them feed the people. Thus at Athens he was one the few who not only allowed the notables to have their mealstogether, but made the notables masters of the clubs. Again, he above all others a despot who loves to rule over subjects, especially his subjects, and to have them pilloried in his banquet tables. Thus atPharsalus he was one of the few who allowed the notables to have their mealstogether, andthis is a royal rule that is not unworthy of a king. AtElis he was the first who not only allowed the notables to have common tables, but made the notables masters of the clubs.  what was he the first to allow the notables to have their mealstogether?
Question: what was he the first to allow the notables to have their mealstogether?

